doc: Add Documentation about install on Broadcom (VMware) ESXi / NSX (#38167)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/installation/k8s-install-broadcom-vmware-esxi-nsx.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _k8s_install_broadcom_vmware_esxi_nsx:

******************************************
Installation on Broadcom VMware ESXI / NSX
******************************************

> Cilium can be installed on VMware ESXI with or without NSX by using official image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cilium can be installed on VMware ESXI with or without NSX by using official image.
```

Deploying Cilium on Broadcom VMware vSphere ESXi with or without NSX(-T)
========================================================================

Cilium can be deployed on VMware vSphere ESXi, with or without NSX(-T).
However, there are known issues when using tunnel mode with VXLAN as the encapsulation.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: VXLAN

        Install Cilium via ``helm install`` with VXLAN Protocol

        .. parsed-literal::

            helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
                --namespace kube-system \\
                --set image.pullPolicy=IfNotPresent \\
                --set ipam.mode=kubernetes \\
                --set tunnelProtocol=vxlan

        .. note::

>             With NSX(-T), you need to change tunnel port using ``--set tunnelPort=8223``
>             There is some known issue about offload when use VXLAN UDP port standard (4789) or draft (8472) like cilium

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            With NSX(-T), use a custom port for the ``tunnelPort`` flag, for instance ``--set tunnelPort=8223``. :gh-issue:`21801` tracks some reports of problems with offloads when using the VXLAN UDP port standard (4789) or draft (8472).
```

    .. group-tab:: Geneve

        Install Cilium via ``helm install`` with Geneve Protocol

        .. parsed-literal::

            helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\
                --namespace kube-system \\
                --set image.pullPolicy=IfNotPresent \\
                --set ipam.mode=kubernetes \\
                --set tunnelProtocol=geneve

        .. note::

>             if you are using NSX(-T) and Network Virtualization (with Edge T0/T1), NSX also use Geneve Protocol between Transport (ESXi, Edge) Nodes.
>             It can be more complicated for debugging and troubleshoot issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            NSX(-T) with Network Virtualization (with Edge T0/T1) also uses Geneve Protocol between Transport Nodes (ESXi, Edge). Be aware when troubleshooting
            that the Geneve traffic you observe on the network may be generated by either NSX(-T) or Cilium.
```

Troubleshooting
===============

Pod Communication Failure Across Hosts
--------------------------------------

When deploying Cilium with some old release ESXi (7) or with NSX-T (3.x/4.x), with VXLAN encapsulation, the inter-host pod communication may fail, except for ICMP (ping), which still functions.

In the :ref:`Cilium-health status <cluster_connectivity_health>` you will see:

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: shell-session
```

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _k8s_install_broadcom_vmware_esxi_nsx:

******************************************
Installation on Broadcom VMware ESXI / NSX
******************************************

Cilium can be installed on VMware ESXI with or without NSX by using official image

Deploying Cilium on Broadcom VMware vSphere ESXi with or without NSX(-T)
========================================================================

Cilium can be deployed on VMware vSphere ESXi, with or without NSX(-T). However, there are known issues when using VXLAN as the encapsulation mode.

Known Issue: Pod Communication Failure Across Hosts

> ===================================================

Reviewer: Rather that framing this install guide as "here are all of the issues" and then following with the mitigation steps, I would suggest following the style for existing guides (such as `Documentation/installation/kind.rst`) and first build up the expected correct way to install first.

This is well written for a troubleshooting article, but as a first step for a user looking to install on this platform I think that the above format would work better to communicate positively what the user should do to have a good experience.

When deploying Cilium with VXLAN encapsulation, inter-host pod communication may fail, except for ICMP (ping), which still functions.

To check if you are affected by this issue, you can run the following command inside a Cilium pod:

.. code-block:: shell-session

    kubectl exec -n kube-system <cilium-pod> -- cilium--health status --verbose

Alternatively, you can use ``k8s-cilium.sh`` to inspect the cluster state refer to the :ref:`troubleshooting_k8s`

> Additionally, you might encounter the following error related to HTTP probes: ``context deadline exceeded (Client.Timeout exceeded while awaiting headers)``

Reviewer: The troubleshooting guide has this suggestion already, but also the underlying problem behind a `cilium-health status` error being reported might not be the offloads issue. It could be, but it could be caused by something else. I wonder whether we need to repeat these troubleshooting steps in an install guide? Or maybe it's enough to just rely on the existing troubleshooting docs.

        ICMP to stack:   OK, RTT=764.463µs
        HTTP to agent:   OK, RTT=1.154573ms
        Endpoint connectivity to 10.42.4.211:
        ICMP to stack:   OK, RTT=765.081µs
        HTTP to agent:   Get "http://10.42.4.211:4240/hello": context deadline exceeded (Client.Timeout exceeded while awaiting headers)

Affected Environments
=====================

This issue has been observed in the following scenarios:

    Older versions of vSphere ESXi (Before 8)
    Deployments using NSX-T (versions 3 or 4) on ESXi 7 or 8

Root Cause
==========

The problem originates from a `bug in the VMXNET3 driver <https://knowledge.broadcom.com/external/article/324199/vm-vxlan-traffic-fails-on-a-host-prepare.html>`__ related to NIC offload support for VXLAN encapsulation. This is due to the use of an outdated standard port (8472) for VXLAN.

Workarounds
===========

**Workaround 1: Use GENEVE Encapsulation**

Switch from VXLAN to GENEVE encapsulation.

.. code-block:: shell-session

    cilium config set tunnel-protocol geneve 

**Workaround 2: Change the VXLAN Port**

Modify the VXLAN port to use the standard port or an alternative one.

.. code-block:: shell-session

>     cilium config set tunnel-port 8423 

Reviewer: Generally in the Cilium guides we prefer to provide Helm instructions as the first preference instead, for example following this pattern:

```
Then, install Cilium release via Helm:                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
.. parsed-literal::                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
   helm install cilium |CHART_RELEASE| \\                                                                                                                                                                                         
      --namespace kube-system \\                                                                                                                                                                                                  
      --set image.pullPolicy=IfNotPresent \\                                                                                                                                                                                      
      --set ipam.mode=kubernetes  \\
      --set tunnelProtocol=vxlan \\
      --set tunnelPort 8423
```

You might consider even using the `group-tab:` feature of sphinx to provide alternative install options for geneve vs. vxlan (examples in `Documentation/gettingstarted/k8s-install-default.rst`).

Reviewer: I wondered briefly about whether to encourage Geneve or VXLAN first and foremost; On one hand I think Geneve is a better choice in general due to better TLV capabilities, but on the other hand I believe NSX uses Geneve for the same reason. If the instructions here are for installing in an NSX environment, it might complicate debugging if both systems use the same tunneling protocol. Maybe we just leave it up to the user.

> **Workaround 3: Disable NIC Offload for Encapsulated Packets**

Reviewer: Assuming the above is reformatted to follow the pattern for "install" instructions similar to the other guides, then this could be converted to a Troubleshooting section at the end of the installation guide. That said, in general I don't love the idea of recommending users to disable offloads. While this is often a helpful, practical instruction, we are not likely to be testing these instructions frequently. It is very easy for us to end up in a position where the software has been updated and the offload issues were fixed, but we maintain outdated documentation that instructs users to disable the offloads, which would only hurt users. Perhaps as an alternative we could just file an issue here on Cilium, list the VMware software versions being used, and describe this as a workaround. For 90% of newer users, they would never experience the issue because they would follow one of the other workarounds; but for affected users they should be able to locate this suggested workaround via an Internet search.
